This relatively new AI lab called
Moonshot AI literally went to the moon a
while back with their latest model
release called Kimi K2 using a brand new
technique called the Muon. Not only is
this one trillion parameter model with
32 billion active parameters the latest
state-of-the-art open- source
non-reasoning model maybe for like a
week only as Quinn's latest model update
just overtook it by a significant
margin. But they provided some extremely
valuable insights that might just change
the pre-training meta. Most of you that
are watching this video are probably
already familiar with this benchmark's
performance. So, I'll just drop a few
facts like how Kim K2 was the number one
model on the EQ bench, which is a
creative writing benchmark, number one
on LM Arena for open models, performs
slightly better than Quen 3205BA22B
reasoning, and still behind Deepsee R1
on scientific reasoning around clot for
Opus level according to Moonshot AI's
official benchmark, but around the level
of GPD 4.1 and Quinn 3235B reasoning,
and just a tiny bit behind Gemini 2.5.
five flash reasoning on third-party
benchmarks. To put all these simply, I
think it was the best open- source
non-reasoning model on the planet before
the existence of the new Quinn 3 model.
So, as the Kimik2 technical report is
out now along with their developers
dropping blocks left and right, I think
I need to do it justice and dive into
the fascinating journey they shared with
their $30 million model training run.
But before I dive into it, with Kim K2
being a model that also focuses on
agentic capabilities, learning how to
utilize the end product is probably more
applicable for yourself than learning
how they actually make it. That's why I
would like to take this chance to share
with you this free resource from HubSpot
called Master AI Agents in 2025, the
strategic advantage. In this free
resource, you will get two comprehensive
playbooks. One is a 42-page long guide
which shows you exactly where AI agents
can deliver you the biggest ROI and
another that's a step-by-step checklist
which will walk you through the AI agent
rollouts. My favorite section is the
common pitfalls and how to avoid them in
the 42page playbook as this is often
overlooked when building custom AI
agents. This is especially common under
an organizational setting as AI agents
may bear too much expectations or
contain challenges that can often be
overlooked. So having these precautions
can significantly improve your chance of
success. But of course, it is still a
crazy power tool. In marketing, AI
agents now shoulder the repetitive work
of content repurposing, social
scheduling, and campaign analytics so
your creatives can stay focused on big
ideas. In sales, they handle prospect
research, meeting prep, and personalized
follow-ups, buying reps back precious
time for relationship building. across
operations. Agents can quietly file
docs, route requests, and surface
real-time analytics so your org runs
like a clockwork. The best part is you
can download these resources completely
free right now. So, if you're ready to
dive into AI agent, check it out using
the link down the description and thank
you HubSpot for sponsoring this video.
Anyways, the highlight of Kim K2 is this
training loss graph and this is no
ordinary training loss. It is actually
using a really new optimizer called Mu1
which was proposed back in October 2024
as it caught the eyes of the AI research
part of Twitter. This promising
optimizer challenged the most common
optimizer that we all know and love
called Adam the blue which has been the
solid goto optimizer for the past 8
years. So what exactly changed that they
decided to use Muon? Well before that
let us take a look at some basics of
optimization in AI. In general, training
an AI model is like spawning in
Minecraft's amplified world, and your
mission is to reach the lowest point
without breaking any blocks. Well, we
usually visualize this as descending
from a lost landscape, but who doesn't
love a good Minecraft analogy? Anyways,
the lowest point stands for the perfect
prediction, classify an image of a cat
as a cat, generate the perfect next
token, and so on. So, all you want to do
is somehow descend to the lowest point
by moving around the world without being
able to see while only taking one step
at a time. But you will be able to learn
the slope whether you are going up or
downwards after each step. And to
determine the direction and the stride
of your step, you would use something
called an optimizer. For the popular
optimizer atom the blue, each step
measures how steep and how jittery its
last and current step was. If the ground
has been steep and smooth, you would
lengthen your stride. If it has been
bumpy, you would shorten your stride.
And the same thing goes for the
direction. You only will want to try to
step in the steepest direction. When two
or three steps you took in the same
direction have the same slope, you would
feel a stronger momentum, right? But the
problem of atom W is once you
accelerate, if that slope starts to turn
in different directions, the momentum
will overshoot you and drag you along
the hill sideways, making you descend
slower and take longer to readjust back
to the optimal. As the momentum would
often overshoot, you can actually
observe it in the loss graph as it makes
up those spiky points in the loss curve.
So, what makes me one different is that
it doesn't easily give into that
momentum to let it drag you sideways or
overshoot in a direction. Right before
each new stride, it would pause to look
around, slowing down that momentum and
twist its momentum to spread it around
all directions evenly and steadily
continue, which lets you descend
accurately. This additional look check
would cost an extra 0.5% compute per
step, but it's actually extremely worth
it empirically because it reduces the
total training needed by up to 35%.
Because Adam W would often overshoot and
the extra time that it takes to readjust
itself towards the optimal makes muon
0.5% overhead much more worth it as muon
reaches the optimal way faster. This is
why the usual muon training loss looks
less spiky than a training loss using
Adam the blue which makes muon a
technique that might just improve
pre-training efficiency in general but
that is if it works on a larger scale of
course because in Kim K2's early
experiment they hit a wall few months
ago they have published research papers
on experimenting with muon like in this
paper called muon is scalable for LM
training which was released back in late
February they have shown a very
attractive scaling law that proved muon
is scalable on a of 16BOE models.
However, things start to get weird when
the model size for their new K2 hits a
trillion total parameters. Right at the
start of training, there will usually be
a few tokens that would blow up with a
gigantic query or key vector. And since
this is at the start of pre-training,
big updates tend to happen. But when the
updates are extremely wrong, the
learning signal that came back would be
oversized. While atomw can dampen the
learning signal for the targeted weights
right away, muon cannot and it will even
spread it across every direction too,
inflating all the weights for the wrong
reason. So the next learning step would
produce even bigger error creating an
insane negative feedback loop that will
eventually break the training and this
was not anticipated in the earlier
scaling law experiments hitting moonshot
AI's team morale. So as they are
struggling to find a way out, the person
that basically invented rope called
Sujin Ling basically came up with an
idea. He proposed something called QK
clip, later known as Muan Clip, which
fixes the issue by simply adding a
threshold. It would basically clip out
the giant query and key norms or the
resulting logits before muon does its
thing to the momentum, taming those
early outliers. And with the muon clip
in place, the runaway logits flattened.
Muon's updates stayed extremely stable,
and K2's trillion parameter training was
finally able to launch without problems.
So, it resulted in this absolute beauty
of a training loss with no loss spikes
in sight. And this loss graph right here
cost them $20 million to generate. So,
you know how important that is,
especially for an AI startup to get it
right in the first attempt. Alongside
this new idea, Muon clip, researchers
over at Moonshot AI have also done some
incredible ablazion studies and they
found some pretty interesting
observations. First of all, their
results have shown that the Deep Seek V3
model design, which is the MLA and the
MOE, is pretty much perfect and
impossible to improve upon. From all the
model architecture modifications they
have made, nothing else surpasses it in
their early scaling law experiments. So,
Deep Sea V3's architecture still remains
supreme. But researchers at Moonshot
still made a few neat adjustment of Kim
and K2's architecture to make it a lot
more costefficient. First is that they
added 50% more experts per layer than
Deepcv V3 yet kept the same active
parameters per token unchanged. This
increases the sparity of thee, but they
were confident to do this because their
experiments confirm a brand new sparity
scaling law. As long as each token still
touches the same number of experts,
bumping the total experts pool never
degrades loss. So more experts just
means there are more options of
specialized subnetss ready to be routed
to. Second, they have the attention
heads because Deep Seek V3's full head
design is actually pretty pricey. K2
then drops to 64 heads instead of using
128, cutting the QKVO projection matrix
from 10 billion parameters down to 5
billion parameters. So this is why
active parameters are now 5 billion
parameters less than deep seb3 and this
reduction in heads only showed around 2%
degradation which is also offset by thee
gain so the trade is a net win. Third
only the firste layer goes dense. Both
Deep Seek V3 and K2 saw router imbalance
spikes right at the start of the
sequence. Deep seat V3 then made the
very first three layers dense. After
some testing from the moonshot
researchers, they found that reducing to
just having the first layer dense is
already good enough with training
already becoming noticeably steadier.
Lastly, they ditched expert grouping and
used a simple router. Because at the
trillion parameter scale, each GPU
basically ends up only holding just one
expert completely skipping a whole level
of abstraction that is having multiple
experts on one GPU during training. Then
when each GPU hosts only one specialist
expert network, the old grouping trick
where the router first pick a basket of
experts that lived on the same GPU and
then choose inside that basket no longer
makes sense because now there's only one
thing in that basket. So no choice are
really made. Moonshot then throws the
grouping layer away and gives the router
a single flat menu of all 384 experts
spread across the cluster all at the
same time. And with the grouping gone,
the search space is now wider. The
router can spread tokens across servers
instead of being trapped inside one GPU.
And they were also able to have the
overall utilization stays high even at a
trillion parameter scale. But yeah, one
trillion parameter model needs 384 GPUs
to hold it all at the same time to
train. Isn't that kind of crazy? And
yeah, I hope today's video at least
cleared up their technical side of
research a bit for you and maybe did
their immense open source effort a bit
more justice. And if you like today's
research breakdown, definitely check out
my newsletter where I cover the latest
in the juiciest research weekly on it. I
will usually cover the best research
papers from the previous week. So if you
don't want to miss out, definitely go
and subscribe. And thank you guys for
watching. A big shout out to Andrew
Chelas, Chris Leoo, Degan Gan, News
Research, Kanan, Robert Zaviasa, Lewis
Muk, Ben Shainer, Marcelo, Ferraria,
Zane, Sheep, Poof, and Enu, DX Research
Group, and many others that support me
through Patreon or YouTube. Follow me on
Twitter if you haven't and I'll see
youall in the next